Hi from Tokyo Japan, and welcome to Jeremy’s IT
Lab. In this video we’re going to cover a topic
that’s a recent addition to the CCNA exam: AI and
machine learning. Ever since ChatGPT was publicly
released in 2022, AI seems to be on everyone’s
mind. So, what is AI? What is machine learning?
And what do they have to do with networking?
We’ll answer those questions and more in
this video. But before we get
started, let me take a minute to shill my books,
Acing the CCNA Exam volumes 1 and 2. I always
recommend studying from multiple resources, and
my books are great in combination with this course
that you’re watching now. AI and machine learning,
the topics of this video, are covered in chapter
22 of volume 2. You can get the books from Amazon,
or directly from the publisher using the links on
the screen right now. Use code au35mcd to get 35%
off either volume, or you can get 50% off if
you buy both together. Now let’s get started.
So, what are we going to cover in this video?
First, I’ll define AI and machine learning. What
are they, how are they related, etc. Then we’ll
examine some different types of machine learning.
Supervised learning, unsupervised learning,
reinforcement learning, and deep learning. We’ll
cover how each of these learning methods works, as
well as their advantages and disadvantages. Then
we’ll move on to predictive and generative AI, as
well as their current and potential applications
to networking. Finally, we’ll cover some specific
AI features of Cisco’s catalyst center. Since the
CCNA is a Cisco exam, it’s always good to
be familiar with Cisco’s own solutions. So,
that’s what’s on the menu for today, now let’s
move on to define AI and machine learning.
So, what is AI? Artificial intelligence,
usually called AI, uses computers to simulate
intelligence, allowing them to exhibit behaviors
typically associated with humans, such as
recognizing patterns, learning, making decisions,
and solving problems. These days, AI models like
ChatGPT are on everyone’s mind, but the field of
AI is much wider and older. Let’s look at just a
few examples of AIs, many of which you’re probably
familiar with. Virtual assistants like Siri,
Alexa, and Google Assistant all use AI. They
help you perform tasks like setting reminders,
answering questions, or controlling smart home
devices by processing your voice commands and
providing relevant responses. Recommendation
systems, like those on Netflix, YouTube,
or Amazon, use AI to analyze your preferences
and suggest content or products tailored to your
tastes. Just as you might recommend a show, video,
or product to a friend based on what you know
about them, these AIs perform a similar role on a
much larger scale. By learning from your viewing,
searching, and purchasing habits, they
continuously refine their recommendations
to offer suggestions they think you’ll enjoy.
Self-driving cars and robotics, such as Tesla's
full self-driving and Waymo, rely on AI to
process sensor data, make real-time decisions,
and navigate complex environments. Chatbots, like
ChatGPT, can generate human-like text for tasks
ranging from customer support to creative writing.
That logo on the right is the chatbot that appears
when you visit cisco.com, for example. That kind
of chatbot is also known as a virtual concierge.
AI is also behind advanced game-playing systems
like Stockfish in Chess and AlphaGo in Go, which
have long surpassed the abilities of even the best
human players of these games. And of course there
are many more examples. The point is that AI is a
very wide field with countless applications. And
AI is only growing in importance thanks to an
increase in computing power, the availability
of big data, and breakthroughs in AI research,
such as the AI boom since ChatGPT’s release.
Next, let’s dive deeper to examine machine
learning. Machine learning, or ML, is a subset of
artificial intelligence that focuses on enabling
computers to learn from data and improve their
performance over time without needing explicit
programming. Instead of relying on hard-coded
instructions from a human, machine learning
algorithms identify patterns in data and use
those patterns to make predictions or decisions.
To put it in context, this blue box represents the
field of AI, and ML is a subset of that field. Not
all AI uses machine learning, but it’s one of the
most impactful components of modern AI. So, how
does machine learning work. Let’s break it down.
At a very high level, it can be broken down into
three parts. This represents the system, or model,
that we want to train with machine learning. The
learning starts with input data. This could be
anything from numbers in a spreadsheet to
images, videos, or text. That data is used
to train a model, meaning the machine learning
algorithm processes the data to learn patterns or
relationships within it. Once trained, the model
can use what it has learned to make predictions or
decisions when new data is provided. This cycle,
learning from data and applying what’s learned,
is what makes ML so powerful. Machine learning
powers many AI applications you already use,
including those listed in the previous slide.
For example, email spam filtering uses machine
learning to identify unwanted messages.
Personalized product recommendations learn
from your previous behavior help you find items
you’ll probably want to buy. Fraud detection
in banking uses previous data to identify
and prevent suspicious activity. It’s also
behind advanced techniques in natural language
processing, which enables computers to process and
understand human language. And of course, there
are plenty more examples. Although, as I said,
not all AI uses machine learning, it is the
driving force behind many modern AI applications.
AI as sophisticated as ChatGPT, for example,
wouldn’t be possible without machine learning.
Now that we know the basics of machine learning,
let’s look at the four main types. First,
supervised learning. This is where the model
is trained on labeled data, meaning the correct
answers are provided during training. The model
uses this data to learn and make predictions or
classifications on new data. Next, unsupervised
learning. In this type, the model is given
unlabeled data, and its goal is to find patterns,
relationships, or groupings within the data.
It’s a more hands-off approach. Then, we have
reinforcement learning. Here, the model learns
by interacting with an environment, receiving
rewards or penalties based on its actions,
and continuously improving to maximize its
performance. For example, this type of learning
is used to train AI in game-playing systems
like AlphaGo, or in self-driving cars, where
the AI learns to navigate by trial and error.
Finally, there is deep learning. Deep learning
is a specialized subset of machine learning that
uses artificial neural networks to handle large
datasets and perform complex tasks. It’s inspired
by the way the human brain, a natural neural
network, processes information. Once again,
AI is a broad field and machine learning is
a subset of AI that drives the most powerful AIs
that exist today, from large language models to
image recognition. Then, supervised, unsupervised,
reinforcement, and deep learning are subsets of
machine learning. We’ll take a look at each of
these learning methods in the following slides,
but keep in mind that these aren’t the only types
of machine learning. They’re just a few of the
most prominent examples, and they aren’t always
exclusive. They can be combined according to the
needs of the particular application. For example,
deep learning neural networks can be trained
using any of the other three methods. Okay, now
let’s look deeper into each of these four types.
We’ll start with supervised learning, which trains
the model on a labeled dataset. This means that
each input provided to the model for training has
a corresponding label. By examining these labeled
examples, the model learns the relationship
between the data and its given labels,
building its understanding during the training
phase. For a simple example, let’s say we want to
train the model to differentiate between photos
of cats and photos of dogs. We start with a set
of labeled training data, meaning each photo is
labeled as either “cat” or “dog”. To train an AI
you should have more than eight photos of course,
but I’m just demonstrating the concept here. So,
you feed the labeled data into the model, and it
should, with enough data, build an understanding
of what a cat looks like and what a dog
looks like. Once the model has been trained,
if you feed it an unlabeled photo of a dog, it
should be able to identify it as a dog. And it
should be able to do the same for a photo of
a cat, too. By training on labeled examples,
the model learns to classify new, unseen data with
high accuracy. So, what are the main advantages
and disadvantages of this method of machine
learning? Well, if labeled data is available,
supervised learning is highly accurate. When
training the model, it’s not going to misinterpret
a cat as a dog, because the cat is already labeled
as a cat. But it requires large, labeled datasets,
which can be expensive and time-consuming
to create. As I said before, you’re going
to need a lot more than eight photos to create
an accurate model. Another advantage is that
it’s straightforward to understand and implement.
The data is already labeled, so you just need to
train the model with as much data as possible
and it should develop a good understanding
of each label’s characteristics. And one more
disadvantage is that the output is limited to the
labels in the training data. For example, if you
train the model only to classify cats and dogs,
it won’t be able recognize or classify a photo
of a bird. This means supervised learning isn’t
ideal for tasks requiring flexibility
or identifying entirely new categories.
Let’s move on to unsupervised learning,
which trains the model on an unlabeled
dataset. This means that no predefined labels are
provided. Instead of being told what each data
point represents, the model analyzes the data to
discover patterns, structures, or relationships on
its own. It can then group similar data points
into clusters based on shared features. Let’s
use the same example as before, feeding the model
photos of cats and dogs. In unsupervised learning,
we feed the model unlabeled training data, so the
images are provided without identifying them as
"cat" or "dog". The model processes the data
and looks for patterns or similarities among
the images. Based on its analysis, it groups the
images into clusters. Here, it has identified
that the cat images all share similar features,
grouping them into cluster 1. The dog photos,
sharing their own set of features, are grouped
into cluster 2. It doesn’t know what these
clusters represent. It simply groups similar
images together based on features like fur
texture, shape, or color patterns. A human can
then interpret these clusters and label cluster
1 as "cat”, and cluster 2 as “dog”. Then, if
you feed the model another image of a dog,
it should be able to recognize that it has similar
features to the other photos in cluster 2, and
assign it to that cluster. And same if you feed it
another photo of a cat. And if you feed it a photo
that’s neither a cat nor a dog, like this bird, it
recognizes that it doesn’t fit into either cluster
and creates a new one. And a human can once again
label that new cluster. So what are the advantages
and disadvantages of unsupervised learning? One
big advantage is that there’s no need for labeled
data, so that saves a lot of time and cost in
labeling huge data sets. But interpretation
and labeling of the results by a human is
still required to make sense of the results.
Another benefit is that unsupervised
learning can reveal hidden patterns or
structures in data that might not be obvious to
a human. For instance, it might group customers
based on purchasing behavior, even if no explicit
labels exist. Because the data isn’t pre-labeled,
the model is free to group the data according
to what it notices, not according to the strict
labels used in supervised learning. But without
labeled data, the model’s accuracy might be lower
than supervised learning for specific tasks.
Unsupervised learning is a powerful tool for
discovering patterns and relationships, especially
when labeled data isn’t available, but it requires
human input to interpret results and might not
always match the precision of supervised learning.
Next, let’s talk about reinforcement learning.
Reinforcement learning trains a model by rewarding
or penalizing its actions in a given environment
to maximize its performance over time. The model
learns to take actions within its environment that
achieve the highest reward or best outcome. So,
how does it work? First, the model, which is
called an agent, interacts with an environment.
It takes an action and receives feedback, which
could be either a reward for a positive action or
a penalty for a negative one. For example, if the
AI is learning to play a game, actions that lead
toward victory would be rewarded, and actions that
lead toward defeat will be penalized. The agent
uses this feedback to adjust its behavior and
learn which actions lead to the best results. And
the cycle repeats, allowing the model to improve
its ability to take the correct actions over time.
Let’s consider some examples of reinforcement
learning in action. In self-driving cars,
the agent learns how to navigate safely by trial
and error, earning rewards for avoiding obstacles
or staying in the lane. In game AI, reinforcement
learning is used to master strategies in games
like Chess, Go, or video games, where the agent
learns by playing and improving over time. And
in robotics, agents can be trained to perform
complex tasks like walking, picking up objects,
or assembling items through reinforcement. Like
the other learning methods we covered, let’s
consider a couple advantages and disadvantages.
It’s capable of learning complex behaviors that
are difficult to program manually. By allowing the
model to interact with the environment on its own,
it can learn these complex behaviors
without manual coding. But it can
be quite resource-intensive, requiring
significant time and computational power,
especially for complex environments. The model has
to spend a lot of time and resources interacting
with the environment. Another advantage is
that it adapts well to dynamic environments,
making it useful for tasks where conditions
are constantly changing. Through reinforcement,
the model can adapt automatically to changes. But
if the reward system isn’t carefully designed,
the agent might focus on short-term rewards
rather than the best long-term outcome. So
the system of rewards and penalties
needs careful planning and design
to avoid suboptimal learning. An interesting
example of reinforcement learning is MarI/O,
a program created by SethBling and shown in
a YouTube video. MarI/O uses reinforcement
learning to teach itself how to play a level
of Super Mario World. It receives rewards for
progressing through the level and, over many
evolutionary generations, builds a model that
can quickly and effectively navigate the level.
MarI/O is not only an example of reinforcement
learning. It also applies the principles
of deep learning, which we’ll cover next.
Deep learning is a subset of machine learning
that uses artificial neural networks to process
and learn from large and complex datasets. An
artificial neural network is a computational
model inspired by how biological neural networks
like the human brain process information. Data is
passed through multiple layers of interconnected
nodes, like the neurons in the human brain,
with each layer extracting increasingly abstract
features. These layers are what make deep learning
so powerful. Note that deep learning isn’t
entirely separate from the other methods we’ve
looked at. Neural networks used in deep learning
can be trained using supervised, unsupervised, or
reinforcement methods. So, it’s essentially a more
advanced way of applying these approaches to solve
complex problems. A deep learning model consists
of an input layer, which receives inputs like
images. Then there are several “hidden layers”,
I’ve shown three here but there could be thousands
in some models. And then there is an output layer.
And these layers are connected by a complex web of
connections, processing data from the input layer
and resulting in outputs in the output layer. For
example, if the purpose of the model is image
recognition, if you feed it an image of a cat,
the result in the output layer should be “cat”. If
you want to learn about how Deep Learning really
works, I recommend watching the neural networks
playlist by 3Blue1Brown on YouTube. It covers much
more than you need to know for the CCNA exam,
but is a great primer on how deep learning and
neural networks work. So, what are the advantages
and disadvantages of deep learning? First of all,
it excels at handling large, unstructured datasets
like images, audio, and text. Data that doesn’t
have a clear, predefined structure; it doesn’t fit
into traditional rows and columns of a database
or spreadsheet. When it comes to tasks like
image recognition, natural language processing,
and autonomous driving, deep learning provides
state-of-the-art performance. But it can be quite
resource-intensive, requiring significant
computational power and large datasets for
training. And it’s often referred to as
a "black box" because the hidden layers
make it hard to interpret how the model
arrives at its decisions. For instance,
while the model might identify a cat accurately,
it’s difficult to pinpoint which specific features
it used to come to that conclusion. But
regardless of any drawbacks, deep learning
is one of the most powerful tools in artificial
intelligence. Looking back again at MarI/O,
notice the neural network that it has built to
navigate through this stage of the game. While I
showed MarI/O as an example of reinforcement
learning, it uses reinforcement to train an
artificial neural network, although deep learning
models typically use many more layers than this.
So, those are the main types of machine
learning we’ll cover in this video:
supervised, unsupervised, reinforcement,
and deep learning. As I mentioned before,
these aren’t the only types of machine learning,
and models can use combinations of these methods.
For example, deep learning models can be
trained using supervised, unsupervised,
or reinforcement learning techniques. There’s also
semi-supervised learning, which combines labeled
and unlabeled data, enjoying the benefits
of both methods. But these four types are
what I recommend knowing for the CCNA exam. Now,
let’s move on to predictive and generative AI,
two key applications of AI that take advantage of
machine learning, and especially deep learning.
Before we dive into each, let’s briefly define
them. Predictive AI uses machine learning to
analyze historical data and predict future
outcomes or trends. A couple of examples are
security anomaly detection in a network, or
weather forecasting. And generative AI uses
machine learning to learn patterns from existing
data and create new content, such as text, images,
or audio. Some well-known examples are
ChatGPT and Gemini for text generation,
or Midjourney and DALL-E for image generation.
This diagram shows where predictive and generative
AI fit within the fields of AI, machine learning,
and deep learning. While the most powerful
predictive and generative AIs today rely on deep
learning, simpler AIs can also exist outside deep
learning, using other machine learning methods.
Now let’s look a bit deeper into predictive
AI. Predictive AI analyzes historical data
to forecast future outcomes, trends, or events. It
identifies patterns and correlations in past data,
and applies those learned patterns to
make predictions about new or future data.
Predictive AI is very widely used for a variety
of applications. Let’s list a few. In healthcare,
it can predict patient outcomes
or the progression of diseases,
helping doctors make better treatment decisions.
For example, AI can analyze an X-ray to identify
diseases earlier than a doctor might in many
cases. In network security, it’s used to detect
anomalies that might indicate potential threats
or failures. It’s also used in traffic management,
where it can predict congestion based on both
historical and real-time traffic data. I’m
referring to road traffic here, but predictive
AI can play the same role for network traffic,
predicting congestion or potential
bottlenecks based on usage patterns.
Businesses rely on predictive AI for forecasting
sales trends or understanding customer behavior,
and meteorologists use it for weather forecasting,
analyzing data to predict future conditions. Okay,
those are just a few examples of predictive
AI, now let’s consider its advantages and
disadvantages. It improves decision-making by
providing actionable insights, enabling you to
detect potential problems before they occur, such
as network issues or severe weather. But to do so,
it requires high-quality and relevant historical
data to be accurate. Without significant amounts
of high-quality data, the AI isn’t likely to make
accurate predictions. And its performance depends
on how well the patterns in past data generalize
to new scenarios. If the future is significantly
different from the past, the model may
struggle to make accurate predictions.
Now let’s look at generative AI, which is
quite popular these days for a variety of uses.
Generative AI learns patterns from existing data
and creates new content, such as text, images,
and audio. It focuses on producing outputs
that resemble the input it was trained on,
but are entirely new creations. For example, let’s
say we train a generative AI model on labeled data
of cats and dogs. This model learns the features
of these animals. Then, if we give it a prompt,
like “Generate an image of a cat,” the AI uses its
understanding of patterns in cat images to create
an entirely new picture of a cat that didn’t exist
before. So, let’s consider some applications of
generative AI. In text generation, tools like
ChatGPT, Gemini, and Copilot can generate
human-like text for tasks such as answering
questions, writing code, or writing emails.
These are called large language models, LLMs. For
image generation, AIs like Midjourney and DALL-E
create detailed artwork from text prompts, like
the diagram above. And in video generation, tools
like OpenAI’s Sora and Google’s Veo 2 can generate
realistic videos based on user input. Now,
let’s look at its advantages and disadvantages.
First of all, it’s great for creative tasks where
human input is limited or time-consuming. For
example, a generative AI chatbot can take over
a lot of online customer service from humans, only
escalating to a human when necessary. Generative
AI enables the automation of content creation
across various fields. But this, of course,
has its downsides. There is a major risk of
misuse, such as deepfakes and plagiarism. There’s
also the problem that generated content is only
as good as the quality of the training material,
as well as the model itself. Let’s be honest,
there’s a lot of AI slop out there. I’ve even seen
an entirely AI-generated CCNA course. Fortunately
for me, AI isn’t ready to take my job just yet,
but that could very well change in the future. And
since I mentioned the material used to train these
AIs, there are serious copyright issues regarding
these models, both in the data used to train them
and in the outputs they generate. Finally, one
more thing worth mentioning is the problem of
hallucinations; basically, making up answers that
are totally incorrect. This is the main reason why
I recommend avoiding large language models like
ChatGPT when you’re studying for the CCNA. It
just isn’t reliable enough. But regardless,
generative AI is clearly a very effective
tool that many of us use daily for various
tasks, and it will only get better from here.
So far in this video, we’ve looked at AI and
machine learning from a more general perspective,
but let’s move on to consider some applications of
predictive and generative AI to networking. First,
here are a few ways that predictive AI can be
applied to networking. Traffic forecasting is
one application. By analyzing past traffic
patterns, AI can predict future patterns,
providing insights into how to optimize bandwidth
allocation and prevent congestion. For example,
the AI could advise you to increase the
bandwidth of a particular link with EtherChannel,
or optimize the QoS policy to allow important
traffic to get through without delay. Security
threat detection is another important application.
If the AI notices anomalies, it can predict that
an attack is occurring or about to occur, helping
to minimize the damage. It can also be applied
to what’s called predictive maintenance. By
anticipating hardware failures in advance,
you can proactively replace faulty hardware before
it causes a major issue. And what about generative
AI? It has several uses, and I’ll demonstrate
a few ways you can use ChatGPT for some of
these applications as well. First, you can use
generative AI for documentation. For example,
by providing information about your network and
its configurations, the AI can automatically
generate documentation for your network. Or
you can use AI to help with generating the
configurations themselves based on the policies
and requirements you provide. For example, in this
clip I provide a simple network diagram to ChatGPT
and ask it to generate configurations that enable
full connectivity in the network. The generated
configurations can then be copied and pasted into
the devices, after verifying that they’re correct,
of course. Another application is network design.
Generative AI can suggest designs tailored to your
specific needs, offering advice and optimizations.
Troubleshooting is another useful application. You
can provide log files or error messages and get
help in the troubleshooting process. For example,
in this clip I share a log message with ChatGPT,
and it outlines the cause of the message, as
well as steps to fix the issue. You should
always verify what ChatGPT says, don’t follow
it blindly, but it can be very helpful in the
troubleshooting process. And the last use case
I’ll mention for now is script generation. You
can use AI to automatically generate network
automation scripts, such as Python scripts to
configure network devices. In other words, you
can automate your automation. In this clip I do
just that, asking ChatGPT to generate a script
to configure a router. Let me repeat myself:
always double-check before using anything ChatGPT
gives you in a real network, as it can hallucinate
and make mistakes. But there’s no doubt that it
has many very useful applications to networking.
Finally, let’s cover some features of Cisco
Catalyst Center that leverage AI. Although
the exam topics list doesn’t say you need to know
these AI features for the exam, it’s good to have
a general idea of how Catalyst Center uses AI.
So, Catalyst Center, which used to be called DNA
Center, features a variety of AI-enabled features
to identify issues before they impact users,
reduce the time required to resolve issues,
and increase the performance and security of
the network. I’ll list some of the features and
then show what some of them look like in Catalyst
Center’s GUI, but if you want a more detailed
look you can check out this video from Cisco,
Discovering the secrets of AI and ML in Cisco
Catalyst Center. I made this short link that
will redirect you to it, jitl.jp/cat-ai, or you
can just google the title to find it. You don’t
have to know everything covered in this video for
the CCNA, but check it out if you’re interested.
So, what are some of those AI features in
Catalyst Center? One is AI Network Analytics,
which is actually an umbrella term that includes
several other features within it. Basically,
it’s all about using AI, specifically machine
learning, to establish the baseline behavior
of the network. In other words, it determines
what is considered “normal” for this network.
It can then provide insights and
recommendations for optimizing the
network, and monitor to predict and detect
anomalies, things outside of the baseline.
Here’s a screenshot showing one small part of
AI Network Analytics. As the legend here shows,
green indicates the predicted
value, or rather range of values,
which is the baseline that has been
established. And blue shows the actual value,
in this case the amount of time it took
hosts to lease an address with DHCP. And
the bottom two graphs show the same thing for
authentication and association times; this data
here is about Wi-Fi connections, but AI Network
Analytics is not limited to Wi-Fi, of course.
And now let’s continue with the Machine Reasoning
Engine, MRE, which uses AI to perform root-cause
analysis when network issues arise. It can then
suggest resolutions or take automated corrective
actions to fix the issue. So, this reduces
downtime by identifying and resolving issues
faster than traditional methods. Traditional
methods might be something like a user complains
about a network issue, you investigate and try
to identify the issue, make some sort of change
to remedy it, and then hope it solves the problem.
MRE can potentially automate that entire process.
Here’s a quick look at MRE in
action. MRE identified an issue,
an interface that is down. Here you can see
its reasoning process; the root cause analysis
that it performs to identify what caused the
issue. And you can see more details here. Now,
I don’t have access to Catalyst Center with
MRE in my lab, so I got this screenshot from
this presentation from Cisco, by the way. If
you want to know more about Catalyst Center,
Cisco has plenty of documentation and
video demos, so they’re worth checking out.
Okay, next we have AI Endpoint Analytics. As
the name suggests, this focuses on endpoints,
the devices connected to the network. AI endpoint
analytics identifies and classifies devices on the
network, providing detailed visibility into those
devices and what they’re doing on the network.
It detects unauthorized devices or unusual
behavior, for example identifying devices engaged
in malicious behavior on the network. And it
simplifies device onboarding by automating
profiling and segmentation. What that means
is, when a device connects to the network,
Catalyst Center can identify what kind of
device it is and apply appropriate security
policies. This enhances security and also simply
reduces workload by automating these tasks. Okay,
the final feature I’ll mention is
AI-enhanced radio resource management,
RRM. This is referring to Wi-Fi: it optimizes
wireless network performance by dynamically
adjusting radio settings on access points. And
it uses AI to balance load among different APs,
reduce interference through
appropriate channel selection,
and improve coverage by automatically adjusting
the transmit power of each access point.
Here’s one small look at AI-enhanced RRM. Here
we see statistics about channel utilization and
interference. And down here some more data about
RRM. Notice here it states RRM changes: changes
that AI has made to optimize Wi-Fi performance in
the LAN. Okay, that’s all for our quick look at
AI in Catalyst Center. Cisco has several products
that incorporate AI in a variety of ways, but for
the CCNA you should just focus on the basics of
AI and machine learning we covered in this video.
Before moving on to the quiz, let’s summarize
what we covered. Artificial intelligence, AI,
uses computers to simulate intelligence, capable
of pattern recognition, learning, problem solving,
and other tasks. Machine learning, ML, is a
subset of AI that focuses on enabling computers to
automatically learn from data and improve without
the need for explicit programming. But like AI,
ML is a wide field and there are a variety of ways
that a computer can learn. We covered four. The
first was supervised learning, in which the model
is trained on labeled data to make predictions or
classifications on new data. I used the example
of training the AI on labeled photos of dogs and
cats. Then there’s unsupervised learning, in
which the model is trained on unlabeled data
to find patterns, relationships, or groupings in
the data on its own without a human labeling the
data beforehand. In reinforcement learning, the
model learns by interacting with an environment,
and receiving penalties or rewards based on its
actions. Self-driving cars and game AIs are great
applications of this. Finally, deep learning uses
multi-layered neural networks, inspired by how the
human brain works, to handle large datasets and
perform complex tasks; more than is typically
possible with other forms of machine learning.
Okay, next we covered predictive and generative
AI. Predictive AI uses machine learning to analyze
historical data and predict future outcomes
or trends. In networking, this can be applied to
network traffic forecasting, threat detection,
and predictive maintenance, to give a few
examples. And generative AI uses machine learning
to learn patterns from existing data and create
new content, such as text and images. ChatGPT
and other popular large language models are good
examples of this. In networking, a few possible
applications are configuration generation,
troubleshooting, and script generation.
This diagram shows the position of predictive and
generative AI within the fields of deep learning,
machine learning, and AI as a whole. Finally,
I introduced a few AI-enablde features of Cisco
Catalyst Center. The four I focused on were AI
network analytics, the machine reasoning engine,
AI endpoint analytics, and AI-enhanced
radio resource management. Okay,
that’s all we covered in the video. Now let’s move
on to a quick quiz to test your understanding.
Here’s quiz question one. Which of
the following types of ML imitates
the human brain? Pause the video
now to think about your answer.
Okay, the answer is C, deep learning. Deep
learning mimics the structure and functioning
of the human brain by using artificial neural
networks with multiple layers. These networks
process information hierarchically, similar to how
the brain processes data, enabling deep learning
models to identify complex patterns and make
predictions. Okay, let’s go to the next question.
Here’s question 2. Which of the following Catalyst
Center features leverages AI to perform
a root-cause analysis of network issues
and propose resolutions? Pause the
video now to think about your answer.
Okay, the answer is C, MRE, which stands for
Machine Reasoning Engine. MRE leverages AI to
perform root-cause analysis of network issues
and propose resolutions. It can also take
automated corrective actions to resolve issues
without human intervention. Okay, next question.
Here’s question 3. Which of the
following statements are true?
Select three. Pause the video
now to think about your answers.
Okay, the correct answers are A, D, and
F. Reinforcement learning relies on a
reward/penalty system to train models based on
actions taken. It is particularly effective for
game AIs, where agents learn strategies by
maximizing rewards. Unsupervised learning
uses unlabeled datasets to find patterns
in data, unlike supervised learning,
which requires labeled data. B is incorrect
because supervised learning works with data
that is already labeled and is not
suited to discovering hidden patterns;
unsupervised learning is better for that. C is
incorrect because, although the most powerful
predictive and generative AIs use deep learning,
it’s not a strict requirement for a predictive or
generative AI. And E is incorrect as supervised
and unsupervised learning can complement each
other, and this is called semi-supervised
learning. Okay, that’s all for the quiz.
And that’s all for this video on AI and machine
learning. While a fundamental understanding of
the basics we covered in this video
should be enough for the CCNA exam,
there’s no doubt that AI’s role in networking
will only grow in the future. AI definitely
has the potential to revolutionize network
automation, so I’m looking forward to what
the future brings. I hope this video
was helpful. Thanks for watching!